So in the last lecture we mentioned some special types of  template tags that can only be used inside the loop.
So you might have heard of the loop before if you have a prior WordPress experience.
But let's have some deeper understanding of what the loop really does. So template tags like the_title() can actually
be used outside of the loop but only if you provide an ID.
So if you provide an ID it will go to the database and find the title of a post with an ID 4. If you
don't on the other hand, it will get to the title from a global variable called $post.
And in case you don't know, a global variable
in PHP is a variable that can be accessed from any file or even from inside a function.
So the loop is basically responsible for setting this global variable $post so that you can use template
tags without providing an ID to get information about the current post in this global post variable.
So I know this might sound a bit vague.
So let's now write some code and then we will take a deeper look on how the loop actually works.
So always make sure first that you have your MAMP server open and then open your browser on the project
directory.
So we had some dummy text here in index.php. Let's finally replace this with some real code. So to
start the loop we must check first if you have any posts.
So we'll use a function called have_posts() inside an if condition. And let's now close the if condition and the
PHP tag and then we'll have to write some else statement here.
So if you don't have any posts maybe you would like to display some message, right?
So inside a P tag let's just put some message and then close the P tag.
Now if we have posts,
we will start our loop,
right?
So in a while loop
we will check if we still have posts using the same have_posts() function.
So now that we are inside the loop, we can now use template tags.
But before using template tags we must call a function called the_post().
And that's very important.
Without calling the_post() we might run into an infinite loop. And we'll see why in the next lecture.
But for now you can think of the_post() as a function that will make the post global variable point to
the right post.
So that template tags will work properly inside the loop.
So inside an H2 tag
now let's get the title.So I'm gonna open an ANCHOR tag inside the H2 tag
and in the "href" let's open PHP and call our first template tag the_permalink().
This template tag will obviously get the link for this blog post.
And then inside the ANCHOR tag let's call the_title().
So inside PHP tags let's call the_title(). And let's remove these arguments we won't need to add
any arguments.
And then let's close the PHP tags. So next you might want to add a "title" attribute to the ANCHOR tag.
So let's add the "title" attribute and let's open PHP.
And then let's call the_title() again.
So the title however can contain some characters that are not allowed in an HTML tag, like single and
double quotes for example.
So WordPress provides another template tag called the_title_attribute() and this will be the same as the_title().
However it will just be cleaned up to be used as a valid title attribute.
So let's now go to the browser and refresh and see what's going on.
And as you can see we have our titles. And let's inspect and make sure we have the attributes and everything.
And as you can see everything is looking fine.
So let's now add another thing. Let's open an empty DIV and let's display some more information about the
post. So first let's display the date of the post.
So I'm gonna type "Posted on" and then I'm gonna add the date as a link. And this link will be the
link of the post, the permalink. As you'll see later
some posts might not have a title. So it's always a good idea to allow users to go to the post by clicking
on the date of the post.
And as you can see here I did not use the_permalink().
I used a function called get_permalink().
If you are completely new to WordPress here's a quick note.
Functions that start with "the" usually echos the result.
And that's why we don't have to add echo before calling the function.
On the other hand functions that start with "get" usually just return the output.
And that's why we have to echo it.
So I'm gonna open a TIME tag now to display the time. And make sure you always use HTML5 tags whenever
applicable.
These tags would make your theme much better in SEO  and also accessibility.
I'm just gonna add some lines here to make this more legible. And let's now display to date and
to display the date
I'm gonna use another template tag called get_the_date(). And this function receives a date format as
an argument.
So let's go and check the documentation for
get_the_date() function. And as you can see the first argument is a PHP date format. And it gives you a link
to the PHP date format and if you open that you will find, you know, some different characters that
will map to different date formats. So let's copy this example and let's add it as an argument to our function.
So each one of these characters will be replaced with something.
So the small "l" will be the full day name the capital "F" will be the full month name and "j" will be the day
number and "Y" will be the year.
We will also need to add some attribute to the TIME tag which is the "datetime".
So to see the description for the datetime attribute and it represents a machine readable date/time
of the time element.
So in order to add this attribute we will use the same get_the_date() function only this time we will
use a different format. So as we saw inside the TIME tag we can use whatever formatting we would like
because that's what humans see. The "datetime" attribute however is what
search engines see,right?
So it must be formatted in a specific way and this specific format corresponds to the character small
"c" in the PHP date format. So let's go back now to the browser and see.
And now we have our dates in the format we wanted.
But now I'm gonna go back and remove that format and that's because get_the_date() function by default
returns the date in the format the user chose in the wp-admin. And by adding a format here
you're kind of forcing the user to have a specific format that they can actually change
in the wp-admin. So most of the time you won't have to provide a format for the date functions.
Let's now add another information about the post which is the post author.
So what we need to do is we need to echo the name of the author. And then wrap this name of the author
with a link. And this link will take us to a page that contains only the posts of this author.
So to get this link we can use a template tag called get_author_posts_url().
And this function needs as an argument
the ID of the author. And to get the ID of the author we will use an other function called
get_the_author_meta(). And this function can get a lot of information about the author.
So we need to specify which information we need.
So we need the ID. And then inside the ANCHOR tag we need to display the author's name.
So let's inside the A tag open PHP and use another template tag called get_the_author().
Great.
So let's now go back to the browser and let's see what we have. And sure enough we have the author name.
And if you click on one of the authors you will have a page for the specific author. And it will only
contain the posts of this author. So let's now go and display one more information about the post. Let's
display the excerpt.
And the excerpt is a short summary of your blog post.
So inside a new DIV I'm gonna call a function or template tag which is called the_excerpt(). And
the excerpt can be either auto generated from the post content or you can specify custom excerpt when
you are creating the post.
And now if you go back to the browser and refresh you will find the short summaries for each blog post.
Let's finally add one more thing. Let's add a Read More link,
which is a link that will just take us to the single blog post page.
So let's add an ANCHOR tag
and in the "href" we will add the permalink to the post. So echo get_the_permalink().
And we'll also need to have a "title" attribute for the A tag so let's copy it from there and just paste it to be
the same.
And then let's type "Read More" inside the A tag. Let's take a look now and we have now a Read More link. And if we click
on it it takes us to the single blog post.
So that's great but there is something that we can do here that can improve accessibility. And in case
you're not familiar, accessibility refers to making a website accessible to everyone including people
with disabilities.
So for instance if a user who can't see is browsing our website, he will be using a screen reader. And a
screen reader is a software that reads out loud the content of a website.
So in our case if the user is navigating through this link, the screen reader will read out read more.
But the user will have no idea
read more about what. So I'm gonna do something now that will tackle this.
I'm gonna open a SPAN tag and then give it a class of "u-screen-reader-text". And currently
this class will do nothing because we haven't yet loaded any CSS. But let's just for now
type in the SPAN let's type of some additional text to the Read More link. So let's type "About" and then the
title of the post.
So when we load our CSS later in the course, this class will hide whatever inside it. So it will only be available
for screen readers. For normal users
however the button will read Read More without any extra text. So let's go now to the browser and see what we
have.
And as you can see we have Read More About Template: Sticky,
Read more about Hello World and so on.
When we load our CSS it will just be Read More.
However screen readers will hear it
read more about something.
So accessibility is actually a big topic. In this course from time to time
I'm gonna give you some tips about how to make your website more accessible. But it's actually a big
topic you might need to maybe watch a separate course for it
if you want to know more about it.
So just one final thing for this lecture.
We now have some posts but these are not all the posts. We need to have pagination in order to see all
the posts, right?
So after the while loop, after the curly braces of the while loop, let's add another template tag which is called
the_post_pagination() and that's really it.
Let's take a look now and refresh.
And as you can see we have pagination and we can browse through pages.
So I think that's it for this lecture.
We now have a loop and we are displaying information about each post, but we don't really know what's
going on behind the scenes.
We don't know what have_posts() function does and what the_post() function does.
So let's try to figure this out in the next lecture.